CENTRAL TRUTH Jesus, the promised Messiah, was sent to save humanity.

LUKE 1:26-30
26 In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was
sent from God to a city of Galilee named
Nazareth, 27 to a virgin betrothed to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house of
David. And the virgin’s name was Mary.
28 And he came to her and said, “Greetings, O
favored one, the Lord is with you!” 29 But she
was greatly troubled at the saying, and tried
to discern what sort of greeting this might be.
30 And the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid,
Mary, for you have found favor with God.

LUKE 1:31-33
will give to him the throne of his father David,
33 and he will reign over the house of Jacob
forever, and of his kingdom there will be
no end.”
34 And Mary said to the angel, “How will this be,
since I am a virgin?” 35 And the angel answered
her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and
the power of the Most High will overshadow
you; therefore the child to be born will be
called holy—the Son of God. 36 And behold,
your relative Elizabeth in her old age has also
LUKE 1:34-38
conceived a son, and this is the sixth month
with her who was called barren. 37 For nothing
will be impossible with God.” 38 And Mary said,
“Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be
to me according to your word.” And the angel
departed from her.

:26. In the sixth month of Elizabeth’s
pregnancy, Gabriel, the same angel who had
appeared to Zechariah previously (see v. 19),
was dispatched by God to Nazareth. This
was a small village in Galilee, a region north of
Judea and Samaria.
1:27. Virgin may echo the prophecy of the
virgin birth in Isaiah 7:14 (see Matt 1:18-25).
According to Jewish law, being betrothed
was just as legally binding as being married
(see Matt. 1:18-19). The house of David
was a clan in the tribe of Judah, from which
LUKE 1:26-30
prophecies said the Messiah would come
(see Gen. 49:9-10).
1:28. Mary was favored because the
Lord set His undeserved grace upon her, not
because she had earned good standing.
1:29. Understandably, Mary was greatly
troubled by Gabriel’s visit and greeting,
wondering how she had come to receive such
an honor.
1:30. Gabriel’s admonishment that Mary
not be afraid was the same thing he said to
Zechariah (see v. 13).
1:31. The miracle that would cause Mary
to conceive . . . and bear a son would be a far
greater miracle than the one that caused
Elizabeth to conceive in old age (see vv. 13,18)
because, unlike Elizabeth, Mary was still a
virgin (see v. 34).
1:32-33. The name Jesus (Greek: Iesous)
is equivalent to the Hebrew Yehoshua (Joshua),
meaning “the Lord is salvation.” Being the Son
of the Most High means Jesus was the Son of
God Himself (see v. 35) because God created
the life in Mary’s womb without the aid of a
LUKE 1:31-33
human father (see note at vv. 34-35). Humanly
speaking, though, Jesus’s lineage would be
traced legitimately through the royal family
of David because Joseph, Jesus’s adoptive
father, was a descendant of David. This made
Jesus heir to David’s throne according to
God’s eternal covenant (forever, and of his
kingdom there will be no end, v. 33; see 2 Sam.
7:13,16).
LUKE 1:34-38
1:34. The difference between Mary’s
response (how will this be) and Zechariah’s
(see v. 18) is that Mary asked her question not
from unbelief but from puzzlement (see v. 38).
1:35. The answer to Mary’s question
about how she could get pregnant while still
being a virgin is that the Holy Spirit would
overshadow her and cause her to conceive
(see note at vv. 31-33). Because the Holy
Spirit was the agent of conception, the child
(see 2 Cor. 5:21; Heb. 4:15) would be the Son
of God.
1:36. There is no way of knowing whether
your relative Elizabeth means Elizabeth was
Mary’s aunt or cousin.
1:37. If ever Mary was tempted to doubt
God’s promise to her, she could recall
Gabriel’s words that nothing will be impossible
with God, as had been shown in the lives of
Abraham and Sarah (see Gen. 18:14).
1:38. Mary’s response is a classic model
of humble commitment (I am the servant of
the Lord) and willing obedience (let it be to me
according to your word).

HISTORY | WHO WAS LUKE? WHY WAS THIS GOSPEL WRITTEN?
Luke, the author of this gospel account, was a physician and historian who traveled with the apostle
Paul on missionary journeys. Luke even remained with Paul when Paul was imprisoned in Rome. Talk
about a ride-or-die friend! The Gospel of Luke is the first volume (with the second volume being Acts)
written to a man named Theophilus. The Gospel of Luke is a well-researched account of the person
and ministry of Jesus, and it was designed both to encourage believers and challenge unbelievers,
especially those from a Greek background.1

What does Jesus’s arrival tell us about God’s character?
Being from the house of David does not mean that Joseph lived in a literal house with a guy named David.
The “house of David” was a tribe within the clan of Judah, which was the tribe that prophecies had said
the Messiah-King would come from (see Micah 5:2; 2 Sam. 7:11-16). By pointing out that Jesus’s earthly
father was from the house of David, Luke is highlighting the Lord’s faithfulness to send them the Messiah
whom He had promised would rescue humanity.

What is God’s “favor”? How have we been recipients of God’s favor?
Gabriel greeted Mary and told her that not only was she “favoured”—“the Lord [was] with [her]” (v. 28).
Another way to think of this is that Mary was “graced” by God to be chosen for a special calling.2 Mary did
nothing to earn this grace. But even though God’s grace toward Mary was undeserved, Gabriel assured her
that the Lord’s presence and power were with her.
Mary was surprised and confused not only by the angel’s visit but also by his message. For God to choose
someone so unlikely was unexpected and worrying to her.3 In response, Gabriel told Mary not to be afraid
and reminded her of the Lord’s favor toward her. The emphasis is not on Mary’s ability or anything she had
done, but on God’s grace alone.

What is significant about the way Gabriel described Jesus to Mary?
Gabriel’s message continues as he tells Mary that she will conceive and give birth to a son, naming Him
Jesus. The name “Jesus” is the Greek translation of the Hebrew name Joshua, which means “the Lord’s
Salvation.”4 By God’s grace and power, Mary would give birth to the promised Savior of the world. The
angel tells Mary that Jesus will be called “Son of the Most High,” meaning that He is the divine Son of God.
Jesus’s lineage would be traced back to King David through His adoptive father, Joseph, making Jesus the
fulfillment of the Lord’s promise to David. The Son of God, the King of kings, would arrive soon. And as
Gabriel tells Mary, “. . . of his kingdom there will be no end.” (v. 33). What good news!

THEOLOGY | WHAT DID THE LORD PROMISE DAVID?
In this passage, Luke shows readers how the Lord remained faithful to His covenant promise to David
through Jesus. In 2 Samuel 7:11-16, the Lord makes a sacred promise with David, ensuring him that
his kingdom will reign forever. While there had been a more immediate fulfillment to some of these
promises, the arrival of King Jesus is the ultimate fulfillment of God’s covenant with David. Jesus is the
King of kings who establishes God’s rule and ushers those who believe into the Lord’s eternal kingdom.

Naturally, Mary was taken aback by the angel’s message. Her question was not one of unbelief but
confusion, since she was a virgin who hadn’t been sexually intimate with Joseph.5 It would take a miracle
for her to become pregnant. Like Mary, we may sometimes be confused about something that God has said
in His Word. And as with Mary, telling Him that we’re confused doesn’t need to mean we don’t believe Him.
Our God is gracious, and we can run to Him with our questions and confusion.

What was the Holy Spirit’s role in Jesus’s birth? Why is this important?
Gabriel didn’t leave Mary completely in the dark. He told her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the
power of the Most High will overshadow you” (v. 35). In short, it was by the Spirit of God that Mary would
bring Jesus into the world. The “overshadowing” that Gabriel describes points back to the Old Testament
when the divine cloud was described as resting on (or overshadowing) the tabernacle (see Ex. 40:34-38).6
Now, the Lord’s power would rest on Mary, enabling her to miraculously conceive and give birth to Jesus.

Why should we acknowledge and celebrate the work God has done in each other’s lives?
The angel then highlighted the miraculous pregnancy of Mary’s relative, Elizabeth, so that Mary could be
encouraged by the Lord’s miracle in Elizabeth’s life. God not only graciously called Mary but would make
it possible for her to fulfill the assignment He gave her. “For nothing will be impossible with God” (v. 37).